Realizing Intelligence

Paul Yaworsky

Information Directorate Air Force Research Laboratory Rome, New York 13441

Abstract

Order exists in the world. The intelligence process enables us to realize that order, to some extent. We provide a high level description of intelligence using simple definitions, basic building blocks, a conceptual framework and general hierarchy. This perspective includes multiple levels of abstraction occurring in space and in time. The resulting model offers simple, useful ways to help realize the essence of intelligence.
Keywords: Intelligence, Cognition, Information, Abstraction, Realization, Framework, General Intelligence Hierarchy

An Orderly Process

Intelligence is an orderly process. The order stems from nature and exists everywhere, in space and in time. The order may be obvious or subtle or seemingly unknown. One of the main jobs of the intelligence process is to realize the order in nature, to some extent, thereby gaining a working knowledge of the world. This knowledge helps with survival, not to mention all the other aspects of human life. Yet our success at survival does not necessarily depend upon our individual level of intelligence. Nor do we need to understand how intelligence works to be intelligent. Intelligence exists in many different forms of life on this planet, varying from low to high levels, yet humans are believed to be the most intelligent life form, so we will focus here on high level (human) intelligence.
What do we really know about intelligence? What benefit is there from describing the process? How can the resulting knowledge improve our situation or help us accomplish our goals? Intelligence is like a big puzzle. There are very many pieces to the puzzle, they can be put together in so many different ways, and the pieces are dynamic (a function of time). While nature’s order may be subtle, one thing the intelligence process does enable us to do is to put its pieces together to form an understanding of the world. However, putting the pieces together can lead to confusion, as complexity often overshadows underlying order, and the overall process involves complex relationships in space and time. There may be nothing in the intelligence process that says we need to understand the process itself. Yet we can try. Contained in nature’s order are countless signals that feed the intelligence process. Over time these signals can reveal existing patterns, trends and tendencies. Humans have been able to learn much about many things over time, not the least of which is the underlying order contained in the intelligence process itself. We can also realize things at multiple levels of abstraction. The ability to abstract is one of the most significant aspects of intelligence, setting humans above all other animals in this respect.
Intelligence is a process that reflects nature’s order. Admittedly the order is complex, but over time humans have developed the ability to unravel some of the complexities while learning more and more about the world. This leads to better realizations, which enable better descriptions, leading to better circumstances and greater opportunities... and the process continues. An overall job of the human brain is to exploit nature’s order, to some extent, thereby forming a model of the external world (in the mind). At birth, the human cerebral cortex (primary region for high order intelligence) has a very large number of neurons loosely connected. Over time and through experience, the brain learns to represent nature’s order internally, in its network of neurons, connections and layers. Neurons develop a propensity for firing (outputting) based on whatever activity is present. Connections form in a hierarchical, layered fashion. The higher up you go in the hierarchy, the richer the relationships and the higher the intelligence capabilities are possible. Overall, the intelligence process enables the brain to perceive sensed signals, learn patterns, represent activity, establish meaning and understand what is going on to some extent. Rich, dynamic relationships form as the brain organizes signals according to spatio-temporal patterns. These patterns and their sequences of activations form a model of the world often referred to as the mind.

Modeling Goals
Our approach to realizing intelligence involves developing a model of intelligence. By model we mean an approximation of the real thing. Real intelligence is tucked safely away within the skull. Our model will be an external, objective representation of the internal intelligence process. How well we describe the process depends on how well we understand and realize the nature of intelligence. We realize that we will fall far short of having a complete model. We also expect that over time many people will contribute and that much more will be learned about the nature of intelligence, in many different disciplines. For example, some key ideas described here leverage the work of Jeff Hawkins [1], with his goal aimed toward creating intelligent machines (computers) through an understanding of the brain. Improved understanding will lead to better descriptions and better implementations.
Our overall goal is to model intelligence using computers. This necessarily requires a sufficient understanding of intelligence. This also requires an understanding of computers, but since computers are designed and built by humans, we consider the computer portion of the goal to be understood well enough for now. Thus we do not focus on computers here. However, intelligence poses many problems. One of the underlying problems has to do with the nature of information and the confusing role it plays in the intelligence process. Information is a very common term with many different contexts and meanings, so we must be careful about how we use the term. We must also understand the differences between information processing performed by humans and computers, because the differences are fundamental and can have a significant impact on our viewpoints and resulting models. Finally, we need to develop computer technology that can assist humans in processing information more “intelligently.” Ultimately this will involve top-down theoretical approaches, bottom-up detailed implementations and advanced information processing somewhere in-between.

Simple Descriptions
We have mentioned that intelligence is an orderly process, yet we acknowledge that the order is anything but simple. All too often the order is not obvious. The nature of intelligence has more or less eluded our grasp since the beginning of time (or at least since the beginning of intelligent life). But all is not lost. Humans have learned a lot about the intelligence process, and history reveals much. Generations of humans have passed down tremendous amounts of knowledge over the years, both explicitly and implicitly. Not only is the body of human knowledge significant, but our abilities to represent, store and communicate knowledge enrich the intelligence process. Built into the fabric of intelligence are the abilities to realize, understand, simplify and describe underlying processes. As such, we aim to do just that here (to the extent that we can), starting with some basic definitions. These definitions are given in the context of human intelligence.
Intelligence is the ability to learn (to acquire knowledge, to abstract, to realize) and recall (apply what has been learned) effectively in a changing environment. To demonstrate intelligence, the learning must be applied or used effectively in a dynamic, real-world environment.
Cognition basically means to know. As such, cognition is a subset of intelligence, and knowledge is a high-order construct of the overall process.
Abstraction is the ability to capture the essence of something in a spatial and/or temporal sense. In a spatial sense, abstraction basically means to change form, for example as signal representations go from formal to formless (e.g., concept). In a temporal sense, abstraction means to change state, for example as signal representations go from timely to timeless. Abstraction represents a significant and orderly kind of change, and leads to powerful forms of learning.
Information is an intermediate kind of signal representing relative spatial or temporal relationships. This makes information a mid-level construct of the intelligence process. Other definitions and contexts exist for information, for example those involving computers and communication systems.
Decision is a choice or conclusion. Basically a decision is the act of considering many options and selecting one (or some function of them). This definition stems from the very nature of neurons in the brain. Neurons have many inputs and one output. This “many-to-one” function is fundamental to intelligence, occurring everywhere from low to high levels of brain activity. Neurons make decisions for a living.
Meaning refers to signal relationships or associations in the brain. The brain accomplishes meaning by way of connectivity along with associated neural activity. Connectivity has a direct impact on meaning since it literally forms relationships among signals. However, since the brain has billions of neurons and trillions of connections, the number of possible combinations of activity is enormous. This helps explain why meaning can and usually does differ among people, since no two people have the exact same mental model or the same set of signals activated at the same time.
Representation is a form of description, designation or memory of signal activity occurring in the brain. Representation not only supports real-time processing but also enables various kinds of storage and communication of signals. Once signals have been presented to the brain, they can then become re- presented by the mind. Spatio-temporal patterns can be learned, represented and combined to form sophisticated models of the world.
Our goal is to model intelligence using computers. We describe our model in a top-down manner using fundamental concepts. We also use basic building blocks in a bottom-up fashion. While these descriptions are simple, they serve as basic components in the construction of our model. Furthermore, the choice of which pieces to use and how to put them together can have a tremendous impact on the resulting model. In the end, we aim for descriptions that provide an overall picture of intelligence and capture the essence of the process. These descriptions will provide the foundation for a better understanding of the intelligence process and lead to the development of better computational models.

Basic Building Blocks
We now describe a set of basic building blocks for our model, inspired by the brain. The first building block is the signal – a basic component of intelligence. In neuroscience, the term signal is often referred to as a spike, pulse, impulse or action potential. However, we use the term signal in a more generic way, to describe any kind of communication or transfer of activity within our model. This includes external signals (inputs to and outputs from the model) as well as internal signals (transfer of activity within the model). Information is another term often used to describe signal activity, but we view information in a narrower context. We will describe later what we mean by this, but basically information refers to intermediate kinds of signals that occur somewhere between lower and higher order signals within the intelligence process.
The neuron is the main processing unit in the brain. The neuron is a type of living cell. Neurons typically consist of a cell body, many dendrites to handle the inputs and an axon to handle the output. This basic structure can vary in different regions of the brain. As signals enter the neuron, each input is processed along with any prior activity stored in the neuron. The neuron’s job is basically to process many inputs and produce a single output at any given time. Thus each neuron basically performs a many-to-one function by virtue of its many-to-one structure. The output signal is a composite, abstract representation of the activity entering and occurring within the neuron at any given time.
Another fundamental building block in the brain is the connection. A connection literally connects one neuron to another. However, these connections (especially within the cerebral cortex) usually are not solid, hard-wired passage ways. Instead, neural connections typically contain a gap or synapse. The synapse does its own processing, thereby serving as a memory unit by virtue of electro-chemical activity occurring across the gap. Each synapse can also act like a switch, since a signal will either pass or not pass, depending on the signal’s energy level along with any preset conditions at the synapse.
Hierarchy is another building block in our model. Hierarchies are cumulative in nature, formed by combinations of neurons and connections. In the brain, many hierarchies exist by virtue of many components being arranged and activated in an orderly fashion. Multiple levels may exist within each hierarchy. At lower levels, many neural entities handle specific details at mostly local scales. At higher levels, fewer yet more significant entities exist within the model. In a larger sense, hierarchies represent a scaled up version of the many-to-one processing that occurs in a single neuron. As signals proceed up the ranks, hierarchies come to represent a natural kind of order (i.e., patterns) in terms of brain function as well as structure. As such, hierarchies are fundamental to intelligence.

Framework
Now that we have described some basic components and simple definitions for our model, we can put them together to form a basic framework (see Figure 1). Although conceptual in nature, this framework does provide a high level view of what the intelligence process may look like. The framework is oriented with two coordinates or dimensions, one that corresponds with signals changing in a spatial sense and the other with signals changing in a temporal sense. Within each dimension, signals become organized into relative hierarchies. Within each hierarchy, a many-to-one reduction occurs as signals proceed upward, going from lower to higher levels. By definition, higher level entities are more significant than lower level ones. Many input signals originate in the external, physical world. Or, so-called input signals can be the result of prior internal processing, occurring in the form of feedback. Of course, many combinations of signals can occur. All signals get processed and transformed as they flow upward within their respective hierarchies. By virtue of hierarchies, this bottom-up activity is another example of many-to-one processing that occurs all across the brain. Output signals, on the other hand, generally flow downward within a hierarchy. These downward signals may go out to the external, physical world (as an external application or use of intelligence), or they may be used internally in the form of feedback to influence bottom-up learning, or both.
In the spatial dimension of this framework, signals have a physical presence and physical characteristics. From an external point of view, signals originating in the physical world have physical form (e.g., formal, physical, concrete). This includes all aspects of three spatial dimensions. However, once signals enter the model in a spatial sense, they become transformed into more generic-like signal representations. The activations and combinations of these signals form patterns, and the patterns can be learned. As lower level signals combine and travel up their respective hierarchies to form higher level signals (realizations), they continue to be processed and transformed. Along the way, the physical form and initial spatial attributes of signals get abstracted out, and ultimately all that remains is their essence. At high levels, this results in things such as concepts, beliefs and theories. These things represent the essence of signals caused by, or coming from, the external world. In essence these high level signals have no form. This transformation process (i.e., change), whereby signals go from representing things with physical form to representing things with no form, is called spatial abstraction. Relative to the external world, physical form gets abstracted out of signals. Therefore, resulting high level signals become form-invariant.

Figure 1. Framework for modeling intelligence in space and time.

In the temporal dimension, signals take on relative significance with respect to time. As nature would have it, signals in the external, physical world have characteristics that are timely, time sensitive and/or quickly changing, relatively speaking. Such temporal characteristics can also be thought of in terms of frequency (how often a signal may change value) or usefulness (how long a signal’s value may be useful). As signals flow upward within temporal hierarchies, they transition into higher and higher level states (e.g., signals become more and more timeless, slow to change or time-insensitive). Higher level signals come to represent the essence of signals with respect to time. This process, whereby signals transition (i.e., change) from representing time- sensitive things to time-insensitive things, is a form of temporal abstraction. As signals transition up their respective hierarchies, time gets abstracted out, and ultimately all that remains is their essence. Therefore, resulting high level signals become time-invariant. For example, the essence of signals in a temporal sense may include things such as general knowledge, basic principles and fundamental theories. Signals also take on temporal significance by virtue of sequences. A sequence is an orderly series of signals occurring over time. Within a temporal hierarchy, lower level signals may represent snapshots in time or perhaps shorter sequences. Higher level signals represent larger timeframes or longer sequences. These higher level constructs naturally represent more of the input space and thus have more temporal significance. The intelligence process is fundamentally a function of time, and temporal characteristics of signals are essential to the process.
Intelligence hinges upon knowledge, and since cognition basically means “to know,” cognition has a prominent place in our framework. That is, the intelligence process leads toward the formation and use of knowledge over time. We view this as a form of temporal abstraction. In a spatial sense, the realization of concepts is a form of spatial abstraction, also fundamental to intelligence. Thus abstraction (i.e., change) occurs with respect to both space and time, and hierarchies form accordingly. As part of the hierarchical processes, many basic signals exist at lower levels, and fewer, more significant signals exist at higher levels. In a spatial sense, high level realizations such as concepts, key points, big ideas and theories are essential to human intelligence. In a temporal sense, high level constructs such as knowledge, theories and long term perspectives are essential. Of course, actual brain signals are inextricably coupled in space and time, and not independent in either context. This framework is merely an artifact, a rough model used to help understand and describe the intelligence process. This model will be modified over time as new knowledge of brain structure develops and as we gain a better understanding of brain function.

Basic Levels of Realization
Our conceptual framework reveals general properties about the intelligence process that become obvious at a high level. From an overall perspective, three basic levels of realization become evident. Whether considered from a spatial or temporal point of view, the highest level of realization (Level 1) is the most “abstract.” That is, the abstract level deals with the essence of things (e.g., concepts, knowledge) as opposed to the formal “here and now” nature of signals in the physical world. At the most abstract level, spatial characteristics are transformed (changed) into signals which have no physical form, and temporal characteristics are transitioned (changed) into signals which are timeless (relatively speaking). However, to the extent that we can describe these abstractions (or describe anything for that matter), a formal language or system of external representations is needed to “inform” the process. These kinds of representations occur at a middle level (Level 2), involving realizations often referred to as “information.” While information is a generic, ubiquitous term, it does serve as a useful descriptor, thereby having a key role within our framework. Resulting descriptions may be tailored and applied to any level of abstraction. Finally, the lowest level of realization (Level 3), in both a spatial and temporal context, is “physical.” This level provides the physical basis for internal signal activity as well as the interface for interaction (Input/Output) with the external, physical world. As such, the physical level supports all levels of signal activity and realization.

Intelligence Hierarchy
The three basic levels of realization mentioned above, as well as the spatial and temporal hierarchies in our conceptual framework, can be combined into a single, general hierarchy of intelligence (see Figure 2). This overall hierarchy helps us to further understand and describe the intelligence process. The lowest level in the hierarchy represents physical signal activity, and is therefore most closely associated with the external world. The physical level also enables higher levels of realization within our model. Built upon the physical level is the so-called information level. Information is a relative, generic term that can be used to describe signal activity internally (connectivity) and externally (communication). Language is an important example of this kind of signal activity. At an even higher level within the intelligence hierarchy are abstract realizations. These abstractions are built upon the physical and information levels of realization and are the result of all kinds of internal activity. As part of human intelligence, these three basic levels of activity are not independent, but must work together. That is, physical signals are used to implement and enable all three levels of realization; information is used to describe activity at all three levels; and abstractions occur as signals are transformed across all three levels of realization. Our ability to understand is a function of the interaction and harmony of signal activity occurring among levels (i.e., top-down/bottom-up resonance). Of course, a tremendous amount of activity can occur at any level, and many sub-levels and hierarchies can also exist.
Within this simple hierarchy, order is implicit, with increasing intelligence capabilities established as you go upward. By definition, higher level entities (and their activations) are more significant than lower level ones. Many input signals enter the hierarchy from the external, physical world. Or, so-called input signals may be activated by way of prior internal processing, occurring in the form of feedback. Either way, this can result in much internal signal activity, with many combinations of signals possible. Input signals generally flow upward within the hierarchy, and this bottom-up activity is called learning. Overall, the learning process transforms (changes) very many signals into fewer, more abstract realizations. On the other hand, output signals generally flow downward within the hierarchy. These downward signals may go out to the external, physical world, or they may be used internally in the form of feedback to influence bottom-up learning, or both. Output signals represent the application or use of that which has previously been learned (this is the second part of our definition of intelligence). Overall signal flow is shown in Figure 2. The resulting complexity is literally mind- boggling (and we are not even talking here about other-than-conscious activity).

Figure 2. General intelligence hierarchy.

The following set of examples can help illustrate the development of intelligence as an orderly progression involving three levels of realization. At the lowest (physical) level is matter and energy. Of course, matter and energy exist in many forms and have many inherent temporal properties, serving as fundamental building blocks in nature. At the middle level in our example is life. Life-forms are a special kind of matter and energy consisting of cells organized in such ways as to enable life-processes. Each living cell contains information coded in the form of DNA, RNA, etc. used to inform matter and energy what to do in order to sustain life. While individual cells work on small scales, groups of cells are organized and combined to form more complex, dynamic, hierarchical systems. This can result in many kinds of life-forms, with varying capabilities. Thus life is enabled by virtue of interactions between the physical and information levels of realization. However, at an even higher level and even more significant is a special kind of life – intelligent life. Intelligence requires the ability to perform abstract realizations (Level 1) of information (Level 2) based on underlying physical activity (Level 3). Neurons are special kinds of cells that enable these high level abstractions. Neurons and their connections are configured in a hierarchical fashion, thereby providing the ability to realize higher levels of abstraction (e.g., knowledge, concepts) as well as the ability to recall (apply or use) those abstractions effectively in a changing environment. Thus neurons perform abstractions at all levels. Of course, higher level intelligence requires lower level capabilities which are enabled by all levels of realization. This makes intelligence a coordinated, cumulative, hierarchical process based upon many capabilities.
These three levels of realization and abstraction are somewhat analogous to the “Three Levels” described by David Marr [2]. While Marr was interested mainly in modeling vision using computational methods, his “Three Levels” approach did indicate the need to understand information processing tasks at various levels of analysis and description. Furthermore, he indicated that if an “information processing” task was not understood well enough at Level 1, then computational modeling efforts focused at lower levels may not work well enough. We realize the significance of Marr’s Level 1 in our model, acknowledging the need for top-down as well as bottom- up approaches in our efforts. After Marr, another way to state the three levels needed to model intelligence are simply: realize, describe and implement.
We close by reemphasizing our specific use of the term information in the general intelligence hierarchy. Within the spectrum of processing, information is an intermediate, relative term. Within our model, information exists between lower (physical) and higher (abstract) levels of processing. While signals can and do exist internally in various forms and at different levels, the only way that humans can process and describe the corresponding activity externally, whether signals originate in the physical world or in the abstract realm, is by using information. This makes information a special kind of signal that can be recognized, processed, acted upon, stored and communicated. Ultimately, information is associated with all kinds of descriptions, representations and languages. Yet we should not forget that the overall purpose of “information” is to support intelligence. Within the whole scheme of things, information is a “means to an end.” The end result is intelligence.

Conclusion
The overall goal is to model intelligence using computers. However, computer technology is not the limiting factor here. What’s needed is a sufficient understanding of the intelligence process itself. We must be able to realize fundamental concepts, describe the overall process as clearly as possible, and implement the process in a physical system. Top-down realizations must be coupled with bottom-up implementations. Obviously, we have a long way to go in our modeling efforts. But the description provided here does offer a simple, useful perspective of intelligence, albeit at a high level.
Intelligence is a process whose order is derived from nature. Signals are processed by the brain in an orderly fashion, undergoing sophisticated abstractions (changes) in space and in time. Resulting signals are organized hierarchically, with many basic components at lower levels giving way to fewer yet more significant entities higher up. From a steady stream of input signals, many lower level pieces combine to form higher level pieces. Each piece can contribute to the harmony of signal patterns occurring in the brain. We describe a framework that provides a big picture of the overall intelligence process in terms of space and time. We discuss three levels of realization that represent the kinds of processing occurring in intelligence. Finally, we simplify these representations into a general intelligence hierarchy that incorporates relevant underlying properties. Within this general hierarchy, the lowest level of realization is physical, the intermediate level is called information, and the highest level is the most abstract. While each level is limited in what it represents, all levels must work together to enable the realization of intelligence.

References
1. Hawkins, Jeff with Sandra Blakeslee, On Intelligence: How a New Understanding of the Brain Will Lead to the Creation of Truly Intelligent Machines, Owl Books, NY, 2004.
2. Marr, David, Vision: A Computational Investigation into the Human Representation and Processing of Visual Information, W. H. Freeman, San Francisco, CA, 1982.
3. Yaworsky, Paul, “Cognitive Information Processing in a Sensor Network,” Final Report to AFOSR, March 4, 2009.
4. Yaworsky, Paul, Douglas Holzhauer, Robert Fleishauer and Walter Koziarz, “Cognitive Network for Atmospheric Sensing,” Proceedings of the 2007 International Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 427- 432, CSREA Press, Athens, GA, 2007.
5. Yaworsky, Paul, “Framework for Modeling the Cognitive Process,” Proceedings of the 10th ICCRTS, Washington, DC, 2005.
6. Yaworsky, Paul, “Toward Automating Intelligent Information Processing,” Air Force Rome Laboratory Report, RL-TR-97-46, 1997.
7. Yaworsky, Paul and James Vaccaro, “Neural Networks, Reliability and Data Analysis,” Air Force Rome Laboratory Report, RL-TR-93-5, 1993.


A Model for General Intelligence
Paul Yaworsky
Information Directorate Air Force Research Laboratory Rome, New York 13441 November 6, 2018

Abstract
The overarching problem in artificial intelligence (AI) is that we do not understand the intelligence process well enough to enable the development of adequate computational models. Much work has been done in AI over the years at lower levels, but a big part of what has been missing involves the high level, abstract, general nature of intelligence. We address this gap by developing a model for general intelligence. To accomplish this, we focus on three basic aspects of intelligence. First, we must realize the general order and nature of intelligence at a high level. Second, we must come to know what these realizations mean with respect to the overall intelligence process. Third, we must describe these realizations as clearly as possible. We propose a hierarchical model to help capture and exploit the order within intelligence. The underlying order involves patterns of signals that become organized, stored and activated in space and time. These patterns can be described using a simple, general hierarchy, with physical signals at the lowest level, information in the middle, and abstract signal representations at the top. This high level perspective provides a “big picture” that literally helps us “see” the intelligence process, thereby enabling fundamental realizations, a better understanding and clear descriptions of the intelligence process. The resulting model can be used to support all kinds of information processing across multiple levels of abstraction. As computer technology improves, and as cooperation increases between humans and computers, people will become more efficient and more productive in performing their information processing tasks.

Introduction
Intelligence is a complex process, but ultimately the process contains order. The order stems from the nature of the external world. The brain, or mind, contains its own kind of internal order. The basic premise here is that the internal model must contain useful representations of the external world. As part of the intelligence process, external order becomes internally realized and represented in the brain. But when you try to model intelligence in something other than the brain, say, in a computer, big problems arise. Ever since computers have existed, people have attempted to model intelligence using computers, with rather limited success.
A different perspective is needed to better realize fundamental aspects of intelligence. We propose a novel approach based on a simple, high level model. This perspective provides a general hierarchy that literally helps us “see” the intelligence process. Using this basic hierarchy as a guide, we gain a better understanding of intelligence, which in turn enables better descriptions of the process. Over time, this general model will enable specific implementations of intelligence using computer hardware and software.
One type of signal involved in intelligence is generically called information. Everyone is familiar with the term, yet no one seems to have a very clear understanding of how it plays into the intelligence process. Using this model, we will show how information and intelligence are interrelated. We will also discuss how information is simply one among many forms of signals, a means to an end, but not necessarily the most significant or most useful form of signal.

Background
Efforts to understand the workings of the mind go back thousands of years. But it was not until the advent of the electronic computer, however, that lots of people got really interested in the notion of modeling intelligence using something other than the human brain (mind). As the computer industry began to take off, very many disciplines and sub-disciplines of Artificial Intelligence (AI) sprang up, each aimed at modeling a portion of intelligence. Some generic terms used today which fall under the umbrella of AI include neural networks, cognitive computing, machine intelligence, machine learning and deep learning.
Over the past sixty years, countless efforts and amounts of money have been spent trying to solve problems associated with modeling intelligence using computers. In 1956, the Dartmouth Summer Research Project on Artificial Intelligence kicked off the field of AI. In their proposal [8] for the famous Dartmouth conference, the founding fathers of AI wanted to “make machines use language, form abstractions and concepts.” These concepts are fundamental to AI and vital to the model described here.
Attempts to engineer the intelligence process depend on making a set of basic realizations. However, these realizations have proven to be elusive and counter-intuitive, since they involve externalizing that which is internal and formalizing that which is abstract. In his research on vision, perception and pattern recognition, David Marr described “Three Levels” of analysis and understanding [12]. His philosophy and approach encompassed much more than the problem of vision though. In general, Marr’s “Three Levels” are: 1) What problem are you trying to solve; 2) How will you solve the problem; and 3) Solve the problem using a physical implementation. Marr pointed out that without properly addressing issues at Level 1, work done at Levels 2 and 3 may not be well-founded. This challenge, as posed at Marr’s Level 1, has been at the root of countless problems for AI researchers for more than sixty years.
More recently, there has been a surge of activity and progress in AI. One example is IBM Watson [9]. According to IBM, their Watson system is a cognitive computer, and they describe cognitive as being able to think, learn, understand, reason and use natural language. The 2011 Jeopardy! Watson Challenge was a significant achievement in its own right. But that was a very structured event operating within tight constraints, even though one of the difficult constraints was human language (text) processing. Since then, IBM has further developed and enhanced their system, but we must realize that even today, Watson’s performance is nowhere near that of human level with respect to general intelligence.
Another approach to AI can be found in the field of machine intelligence. For example, Jeff Hawkins [5] and the folks at Numenta aim to discover the operating principles of the human neocortex and to develop machine intelligence technology based on those principles. Hawkins has described intelligence in terms of patterns that become organized into spatio-temporal hierarchies in the brain. He has also pointed out something that Francis Crick mentioned earlier, that a “broad framework of ideas” is needed to help describe the intelligence process. The work described in this paper aims to provide such a framework as we attempt to capture the essence of the intelligence process in terms of a general, high level model.
Google is also heavily invested in AI. Their mission [7], to “organize the world’s information and make it universally accessible and useful,” is basically an AI mission, since it combines what intelligence can do with what vast amounts of interconnected computers can do. Google DeepMind has a mission even more focused on intelligence [6], and that is to “solve intelligence and use it to make the world a better place.” Their approach incorporates deep neural networks, which offer the benefits of learning, layers, levels, abstractions, hierarchies, patterns, memory and representation, among all that is needed to solve the intelligence problem.
Other large US companies such as Amazon, Facebook, Apple, Intel, NVidia and Microsoft are interested in AI as well. Of course, countless organizations large and small, all over the world, have also become focused on AI. While much progress has been made in decades past and more recently, it seems like more questions may have been raised than answered [11]. Perhaps the right questions have not yet been asked. An underlying problem is that the intelligence process is not understood well enough to enable sufficient hardware or software models, to say the least.
We take a fundamental look at the nature of the intelligence process. At a high level, this kind of work is abstract and general by its very nature. But we must realize that two of the most fundamental functions a neuron can perform are to abstract and to generalize. Neurons do this continuously as they process many inputs and produce a single output (that is, neurons make decisions for a living). And when you scale up this functionality to higher and higher levels of intelligence, you get more significant abstractions and generalizations. You also get hierarchies. And along the way, ‘information’ just has to play an important role in the process. These fundamental concepts are essential to our approach in the development of a general model for AI.

A Simple, Hierarchical Model
The overarching problem in AI is this: what is the nature of the intelligence process such that we can model it using computers? To solve this problem, we focus on three general aspects of intelligence. First, we must realize (to the extent possible) the general nature of intelligence. Second, we must know what these realizations mean or represent with respect to the overall intelligence process. Third, we must be able to describe these realizations as clearly as possible. Note that initially these descriptions can come in any form, using any language (for example, English). Inherently, any description will necessarily involve the concept of information. All this will result in a basic understanding of intelligence. We must then describe this understanding clearly enough to enable subsequent implementations in computer hardware and software. The resulting model may serve as a foundation to support future work incorporating the functionality of intelligence combined with the benefits of computer technology.
In this paper we portray intelligence as an orderly, organized process using a simple hierarchy (Figure 1). With three basic levels of realization and with information at the core, this hierarchy offers a unique perspective of the intelligence process. The following description provides a brief overview of this general model.
The real world naturally contains order and organization. An important job of the human brain is to try and exploit that order and organization to some extent, thereby forming an internal model of the external world. This model enables learning and understanding, which further enable internal processes such as memory and decisions, as well as external activity such as movement and communication. The overall flow of input signal activity and learning within the model is bottom-up, with a many-to-one kind of reduction process occurring. The overall flow of output activity, or recall of learned signal representations, tends to be top-down. Understanding is a top-down/bottom-up harmony or resonance of signal activity. Intelligence is the ability to learn and recall effectively in a changing environment.
Physical activity occurring in the external world may be perceived by the senses. Resulting signals are transmitted to the brain. Over time, with experience and through learning, these signals become transitioned, transformed and stored as rich sets of signal patterns. These patterns are dynamic and considered very complex. However, fundamentally they must be the combination of many simple components. One useful feature of these patterns is that their components contain order, and that order can be represented using a general intelligence hierarchy.

Figure 1. General intelligence hierarchy.

Nature’s external order and organization can be modeled internally in the brain (mind) in the form of very many hierarchies. The brain uses neurons and connections as basic building blocks to form these hierarchies. At a small scale, each neuron takes many inputs and generates a single output. Out of all the activity, through experience and learning, connections among neurons are formed. Over time, very many neurons and connections combine and scale upward to form complex hierarchies across multiple layers of processing. These hierarchies capture and represent the order present in signals coming from the external world. This externally driven activity combines with internally existing patterns, resulting in a general model (i.e., mind) that represents all the signal activity occurring within the brain. Along with hierarchies comes rank ordering, with the most significant things at the top, relatively speaking. Next we discuss hierarchies in a temporal as well as spatial sense. Then we combine these two kinds of hierarchies to form a simple, single model for general intelligence.

Temporal Hierarchy
In a temporal sense, external inputs to the brain contain signals that are dynamic; that is, the signals have temporal components that change over time. Our senses perceive signals as having timely or time- sensitive characteristics. Such characteristics include signals with short intervals or short time scales associated with them (relatively speaking). These signals are real-world, dynamic and continuously changing. However, beginning with all this so-called low level activity, signals travel up the hierarchies and transition through multiple levels. Along the way, time gets abstracted out of the signals. Ultimately, all that remains is their essence. What this means is that high level signal entities (representations) tend toward being timeless; they have characteristics which are slow-changing, have a long time scale associated with them, or they are non-changing. These include signal representations such as general knowledge, basic principles and fundamental theories. Granted, the temporal characteristics associated with these kinds of signals are relative, but nonetheless timing is one of their fundamental properties.
The temporal hierarchy can also be described using the so-called data to information to knowledge progression. In a temporal context, lots of low level data enters the brain via the senses. Input data tends to be quickly changing, time-sensitive and the least organized, relatively speaking. As signals travel up the hierarchy, they transition into information, an intermediate, more organized (albeit ambiguous) state. Then, at the highest level of the hierarchy, even fewer entities remain. These signals are the most significant with respect to time, a key example being knowledge. Relatively speaking, knowledge is time- insensitive, slow to change (if it changes at all) and the most organized of the three types of signal-states mentioned. As such, knowledge (cognition) is a significant part of the overall intelligence process.

Spatial Hierarchy
Similarly, in a spatial sense, signals undergo transformations or changes with respect to form. These signals form hierarchical patterns that are orderly and organized spatially. Stemming from the external world, signals which have physical or formal characteristics may be perceived by our senses. This allows these formal, physical signals (e.g., images, symbols) to become represented in our brain. However, upon entering the brain, the signals go through various kinds of changes (transformations) in a spatial sense. As signals travel up the hierarchies, form gets abstracted out. Eventually, all that remains is their essence. What this means is that the resulting high level signal entities have no form. This includes things such as ideas, concepts and beliefs. And since signals naturally progress inward and upward, toward the top of hierarchies, this implies that higher level signals are more significant than the lower level signals used to form them. Furthermore, the spatial abstraction hierarchy reveals the importance of realization in producing these higher level entities. That is, lower level signals may originate in the real world in a physical, formal or concrete sense. But as they travel up the hierarchy, these signals become realized internally in different forms (mental representations). As such, the resulting representations become more important, and their realizations (abstractions) become essential components of high level intelligence.

General Hierarchy
In a modeling sense, the temporal and spatial abstraction hierarchies may be combined to form a single, general hierarchy (Figure 1). This provides a big picture of the overall intelligence process. From a temporal point of view, the data to information to knowledge progression provides useful ways to characterize fundamental features of signal components with respect to time. From a spatial point of view, specific physical signals occurring at lower levels give way to more general, abstract entities at higher levels. In general, the overall flow of input signals is many-to-one, as signals travel upward within spatio- temporal hierarchies. This signal reduction process results in fewer and fewer entities near the top of hierarchies. Along the way, inherent signal characteristics become represented in fewer, more abstract and general ways. The higher level signal components are also more significant with respect to intelligence. Taken together, this orderly activity results in the realization of a model for general intelligence which captures hierarchical features of signals occurring and changing in both space and in time.

Impact, Levels, Concerns
What is the significance and impact of developing a model for general intelligence? More generically, so what if ‘artificial intelligence’ (we use the term loosely here) succeeds? What difference will it make? The short answer is that everyone will benefit. In the context of human-kind, an initial payoff is a raised level of understanding about intelligence; we can all learn more about how our mind/brain works in simple, general terms. In the context of computer technology, computers are becoming more and more capable. These days, we hear terms such as “smart” or “cognitive” or “intelligent” often used to describe the latest capabilities of digital devices (i.e., computer technology). The technology payoff is this: as computers continue to improve, and as cooperation increases between humans and computers, people will become more efficient and more productive in their information processing activities. We must remember that computers work for us! The field of artificial intelligence has been around for over sixty years, and much progress has been accomplished. However, it is clear that AI needs a better foundation and we have a long way to go. The model described here can be used to help support future generations of artificial intelligence.

Since natural intelligence involves information processing and signal activity at multiple levels of abstraction, representation and realization, it stands to reason that artificial intelligence might also incorporate similar levels of abstraction, representation and realization. With respect to the intelligence process, these levels can generally be described as follows (after Marr’s Levels): Level 1) Understanding (abstract concepts, general knowledge, theory) Level 2) Description (information, algorithms, software, language) Level 3) Implementation (physical system, hardware, raw data)
However, the vast majority of work in AI has occurred at Levels 2 and 3. While the importance of hardware, software, algorithms, big data, etc. is obvious, we must also acknowledge that all levels of processing are needed to achieve AI. The approach described in this paper focuses mainly on Levels 1 and 2, with the implication that resulting insight, understanding and descriptions may be used to support all levels of intelligent information processing. Having a big picture is useful. Furthermore, it is very powerful when top-down and bottom-up approaches can effectively be combined.
What about the concerns of AI running amok and taking over human-kind? It is believed that AI will someday become a very powerful technology. But as with any new technology or capability, problems tend to crop up. Especially with respect to general AI, or artificial general intelligence (AGI), there is tremendous potential, for both good and bad. We will not get into all the hype and speculation here, but suffice it to say that many of the problems we hear about today concerning AI are due to sketchy predictions involving intelligence. Not only is it difficult to make good scientific predictions in general, but when the science in question involves intelligence itself, as it does with AI, then the predictions are almost impossible to make correctly. Again, the main reason is because we do not understand intelligence well enough to enable accurate predictions. In any event, what we must do with AI is proceed with caution.

Conclusion
Intelligence involves information processing at multiple levels of abstraction. Human intelligence no doubt involves high levels of processing (i.e., abstract, general), yet the majority of work in AI is done at more specific, lower levels of abstraction. Something (actually, a lot) is missing in AI. We address this void by developing a high level model for general intelligence. This model is hierarchical in nature, exploiting order present within the intelligence process. The order can be described using a simple, general hierarchy, with physical signals at the lowest level, information in the middle, and abstract signal representations at the top. This high level view provides a “big picture” of intelligence, thereby enabling fundamental realizations, better understanding and more clear descriptions of the process. Along with improvements in computer technology, including enhanced hardware, the incorporation of learning and better methods of cooperation, humans will come to use their computational counterparts in countless ways as we face the future together.

References
1 Arbib, M., Editor, The Handbook of Brain Theory and Neural Networks, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1995.
2 Churchland, P. and Sejnowski, T., The Computational Brain, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1993.
3 Crevier, D., AI: The Tumultuous History of the Search for Artificial Intelligence, Basic Books, NY,
1993.
4 Fogel, D., Evolutionary Computation: Toward a New Philosophy of Machine Intelligence, IEEE
Press, Piscataway, NJ, 1995.
5 Hawkins, J. and Blakeslee, S., On Intelligence, Owl Books, New York, NY, 2004.
6 https://deepmind.com/about/, March 2018.
7 https://google.com/about/our-company/, March 2018.
8 https://rockfound.rockarch.org/documents/20181/35639/AI.pdf/a6db3ab9-0f2a-4ba0-8c28-
beab66b2c062, Proposal for the 1956 Dartmouth AI Conference, March 2018.
9 https://www.ibm.com/watson/about/, March 2018.
10 Kurzweil, R., The Age of Intelligent Machines, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1990.
11 Marcus, G., “Deep Learning: A Critical Appraisal,” arXiv, cs.AI, 2018.
12 Marr, D., Vision: A Computational Investigation into the Human Representation and Processing of
Visual Information, W. H. Freeman and Company, San Francisco, CA, 1982.
13 Minsky, M., The Society of Mind, Simon and Schuster, NY, 1986.
14 Newell, A., Unified Theories of Cognition, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1990.
15 Nilsson, N., Artificial Intelligence: A New Synthesis, Morgan Kaufman Publishers, Inc., San
Francisco, CA, 1998.
16 Penrose, R., The Emperor’s New Mind: Concerning Computers, Minds and the Laws of Physics,
Oxford University Press, NY, 1989.
17 Pfeifer, R. and Scheier, C., Understanding Intelligence, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1999.
18 Russell, S. and Norvig, P., Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, Prentice Hall, Englewood
Cliffs, NJ, 1995.
19 Simon, H., The Sciences of the Artificial, 3rd Edition, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1996.
20 Sun, R., Coward, L. A. and Zenzen, M. J., “On Levels of Cognitive Modeling,” Philosophical
Psychology, Vol. 18, No. 5, pp. 613-637, 2005.
21 Yaworsky, P., “Realizing Intelligence,” arXiv, cs.AI, 2018.
22 Yaworsky, P., “Cognitive Information Processing in a Sensor Network,” Final Report to AFOSR,
2009.
23 Yaworsky, P., Holzhauer, D., Fleishauer, R. and Koziarz, W., “Cognitive Network for Atmospheric
Sensing,” Proceedings of the 2007 International Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 427-432,
CSREA Press, Athens, GA, 2007.
24 Yaworsky, P., “Framework for Modeling the Cognitive Process,” Proceedings of the 10th ICCRTS,
Washington, DC, 2005.
25 Yaworsky, P., “Toward Automating Intelligent Information Processing,” Air Force Rome Laboratory
Report, RL-TR-97-46, 1997.
26 Yaworsky, P. and Vaccaro, J., “Neural Networks, Reliability and Data Analysis,” Air Force Rome
Laboratory Report, RL-TR-93-5, 1993.


10th International Command and Control Research and Technology Symposium: The Future of C2

Framework for Modeling the Cognitive Process

Paul S. Yaworsky
Air Force Research Laboratory/IFSB 525 Brooks Road
Rome, NY 13441-4505 315-330-3690 Paul.Yaworsky@rl.af.mil

Abstract
Information is key to command and control. Yet information alone is not enough; information is neither the problem nor the solution when it comes to issues of command and control. Use of information is essential. That which is commonly called “information” generically exists in many forms, with each form having temporal implications. Furthermore, with so much information readily available and increasingly so, we must develop better ways to combat information overload. Interestingly, the cognitive process itself sheds much light on problems facing the information age and can provide insight into what is going on with information at a fundamental level. In considering such a process, one should examine where information comes from, where it is going, what it’s nature is and how it is used. This paper describes a signal-based perspective of information and how signals in general fuel the cognitive process. More significantly, we introduce a novel framework for conceptualizing the cognitive process.
We describe cognition and related topics at a high level and in simple terms using ordinary language. Yet seemingly simple concepts, when combined and viewed a certain way, can take on significant meaning. We present the concept of abstraction as one of two dimensions in our framework. Here abstraction is viewed overall as a function of space or form, with signals ranging anywhere from concrete to abstract. At one end of this spectrum are physical signals, for instance ones which are tangible and may readily be perceived by the senses. At the other end of the spectrum are abstract signals, for instance ones which may be conceived or realized by the mind but lack physical form. The second dimension in our framework represents time. Here the concept of generalization is portrayed overall as being a function of time or frequency, with signals ranging anywhere from data (time-sensitive, high frequency and least organized) to information to knowledge (time-insensitive, infrequently changing and most organized). In this dimension, signals tend to flow from many pieces of specific data (i.e., details) to fewer items having more significance (i.e., general knowledge). We combine the concepts of abstraction and generalization within our approach to form a unique perspective of the cognitive process, with information at the core, suggesting that this perspective may facilitate the modeling of cognition.

Framework for Modeling the Cognitive Process
Paul S. Yaworsky
Air Force Research Laboratory/IFSB Rome, NY
Keywords:
Cognitive Process Modeling, Cognition, Conceptual Framework, Information, Abstraction, Generalization

Introduction
The word “cognition” is a derivative of the Latin word cognoscere, which means, “to come to know.” From this definition we can see that cognition involves the creation and acquisition of knowledge. This can lead to associating cognition with learning, and with understanding, and meaning and thinking and intelligence, and so on. Trying to describe these terms, especially cognition and intelligence, leads to many difficulties, not the least of which are various definitions and perspectives. While we do see similarities and differences among the processes of cognition and intelligence, we will mainly use the term cognition here at the expense of (our) intelligence. We will describe cognition and related topics using simple concepts and ordinary language. But first we try to place cognition within our overall perspective of intelligence.
We view intelligence to be an all-encompassing process that involves mind and brain, cognition and behavior, to include all mental and physical aspects of brain activity. For the purposes of this discussion, we view cognition to be an underlying process of intelligence, and especially one which helps accomplish knowledge acquisition and learning. We will not discuss here the differences between cognition and intelligence, nor will we discuss much about learning. However, within our perspective we view cognition to be a sub-process of intelligence that involves the transformation of raw data signals into information signals and then into knowledge signals. Very closely related to cognition is generalization, a process by which signals may vary from specific to general at any point in space and thereby constitutes the state of signals as a function of time. We consider generalization to be a fundamental dimension of cognition. Another fundamental dimension of cognition identified here is abstraction. In the abstraction dimension, signals may vary from concrete to abstract at any point in time and constitute the representation of signals as a function of space. Together abstraction and generalization “frame” our perspective of cognition in a two-dimensional sense and may be used as a framework for modeling the cognitive process.
Our framework consists of many seemingly simple concepts. Yet when combined a certain way, these concepts take on significant meaning within our perspective. We describe basic concepts using common, everyday language. We define important terms to help clarify our perspective and give examples to help illustrate our meaning. We even discuss meaning itself with respect to cognition and intelligence, and suggest how meaning contributes to understanding within our framework. With this description, we will have combined many simple concepts to form the shell of a model of a tremendously complex process – the cognitive process.
From an information processing point of view, we are interested in how information gets transformed into knowledge in support of intelligence. This transformation process is literally the basis of cognition. Furthermore, we view intelligence as being an overarching process of cognition, with both processes being orderly and signal- based. We propose our framework as a way of portraying this order and viewing the signal-based transformations in space and in time. We aim to understand portions of intelligence and to describe them as clearly as possible at a high level. Once fundamental concepts are realized and described, they may better be implemented using modeling and simulation technology. We have a long way to go for this. Given the significance of abstraction and generalization in our framework, two major challenges here are to formalize abstract concepts and to be as specific as possible while describing general concepts. Such is the nature of the beast. Our framework directly reflects these challenges. We have benefited from the work of many others in various disciplines while forming our unique perspective. We acknowledge that this work represents a mere sampling of the wealth of knowledge available on this complex topic.
The task before us represents a formidable challenge, one that involves the integration of information, intelligence and computers. Each of these entities is the subject of entire disciplines. Information, loosely speaking, is the lifeblood of intelligence. Intelligence is the product of the mind. And automation, as used here, represents the relatively recent capabilities enabled by the electronic computer. Our aim is to examine these and other disciplines while focusing on one piece of the intelligence puzzle from a modeling point of view. The piece we focus on is a framework, with details omitted. We have developed our conceptual model with the perspective that intelligence is an orderly, signal-based process involving complex transformations in space and time. Since we are ultimately dealing with a model of intelligence, and since all models are approximations of reality, we are not interested in developing an exact copy of natural intelligence. We aim to provide an approximation, a conceptual model, a basic description of cognition as part of the intelligence process. Most of the concepts presented in this modeling framework are relatively simple, and they are not new. However, as combined they form a new perspective on a theory of mind that may seem unbelievably simple at first. Our description is a contribution, however small, to the formidable task of modeling intelligence.

Definitions
We begin with a set of definitions. Admittedly, the terms we use can be defined in many different ways, and typically are. We merely provide these definitions as a basis of discussion. Intelligence is defined as the ability to transform a variety of signals into knowledge and to effectively apply that knowledge in a changing environment. Cognition is defined as the ability to acquire knowledge, or the ability to know and understand. As such, cognition is viewed as a sub-process of intelligence. Understanding is the set of realizations of signal relationships that occur as part of cognition. These realizations involve the coupling of underlying physical structure (i.e., brain) with overlaying mental function (i.e., mind). Meaning is the result of the process by which signals are assigned values. Signals obtain value or meaning within the mind-model by associating activated formal structures with activated abstract functions using dynamic links. Learning is defined as the acquisition of knowledge. This implies first the ability to cognize signal relationships, then to make associations among them and, perhaps most importantly, to recognize them later. Learning causes change, and that change is recorded in a lasting structure that dynamically supports the functions of intelligence. Finally, information is a generic term used to describe signals that interact in many ways and are transformed during the intelligence process. The term information is often used elsewhere as being synonymous with data, knowledge and other forms of signals. We place the term information at the center of our conceptual framework and will distinguish our use of terms within the context of this framework.

A Conceptual Framework for Modeling the Cognitive Process
We will describe our conceptual framework using graphical examples to help illustrate main points. We form the two dimensions of our framework using the concepts of abstraction and generalization, as shown in Figure 1. In the abstraction dimension, signals are considered to be a function of space. This means that in this dimension signals must conceptually take on physical shape or form, varying anywhere from concrete to abstract at any point in time. The overall flow of signals in this dimension tends toward increasing abstraction. Representation of signals as a function of space becomes a major modeling issue. We will discuss abstraction more later in this section. Generalization is used as the other dimension in this conceptual framework, with signals being a function of time, or more literally, frequency. In this dimension, signal types can vary anywhere from specific to general at any point in space and their frequency designates their relative state of processing. This means that as signals become transformed during the cognitive process, the frequency of resulting signal-states can vary anywhere from quickly changing (data) to those which change less frequently (information) to states which are very slow to change (knowledge), if they change at all. This relative state of processing is another major modeling issue. The overall flow of signals in this dimension is toward increasing generalization. This aspect of cognition will also be described more later in this section.


Raw

Conceptual

Theoretical

Data

Information

Knowledge

Practical

Formal

Fundamental

Abstract

Concrete

Specific

Generalization

General

Figure 1. A conceptual framework for modeling the cognitive process.

Signal-Based Approach
When we use the term signals in our description of cognition, we imply mental signal activity, or signal activity modeled after that which must occur in the brain. Yet in reality, mental signals have physical characteristics as well, consisting of frequency, phase and amplitude components. In this overview we provide no details on the physical or mathematical nature of signals. And while much is known in various disciplines concerning neural signals and their related processes, too little is known about the actual nature of mental signals and especially the implications of these signals with respect to underlying cognitive processes. Nonetheless, we consider mental signals and their components as raw materials for cognition. Within our signal-based approach to automating intelligence, we acknowledge that order and organization must be present in mental signals and serve as a natural and fundamental part of cognition. We realize that to model cognition means to exploit its underlying order and organization. Naturally, our signal- based approach draws from many disciplines. In general, we consider signals, a more generic term for what the concept information represents, to be the lifeblood of intelligence.
Using this conceptual framework, we view signals from an “information processing point of view.” By this we mean that, while the signals themselves may generically be termed information or data or whatever, their relative state of representation and processing takes on special meaning with respect to cognition and the overall intelligence process. In the context of our framework, information is just one of several signal-states within the cognitive process. Furthermore, as part of the framework, information may exist at various levels of abstraction. Granted, many of the concepts presented here are themselves abstract and consequently difficult to explain, but this framework does provide a useful way of viewing cognition. In time, this framework will be improved upon in support of the many details needed to model cognition.

Symbol and Direction for the Framework
A basic symbol used here to represent this conceptual framework is shown in Figure 2. With only three states highlighted in one dimension (Data, Information and Knowledge), the overall framework is represented using a rectangular symbol with nine regions. For an even simpler symbol of the framework, the nine regions may be depicted with no states labeled.

Abstraction

DATA

INFORMATION

KNOWLEDGE

Figure 2. A symbol used to represent this conceptual framework.

The next illustration (Figure 3) shows cognition as a process that proceeds generally from left to right with respect to the overall conceptual framework. We choose this direction to reflect the significant role “knowledge” plays in the cognitive process. Later we discuss signal- flow in the abstraction dimension. While this description may seem overly simple, the proposed progression does speaking. Note that our use here of the term data is quite different from more conventional uses such as in the terms “data processing” and “data analysis.” However, the main points here are that data signals are the least organized, have the highest frequency and comprise the majority of input signals. At the other end of the process, signals tend to be output as knowledge, the most organized of the three signal-states. Relatively speaking, knowledge signals have the lowest frequency, which implies that knowledge is slow to form and slow to change, if it changes at all. Furthermore, while cognition must involve iterative processes, knowledge does not always have to be output but may be stored within the mind-model for future activity, whether that activity be internal (as in thinking) or external (as in communication). Finally, information is the term used in the center of the framework (see Figure 1). As such, information will serve as the intermediate state between data and knowledge in the generalization dimension, and also as the intermediate form between abstract and
   help to constrain the cognitive process from a modeling standpoint by identifying an overall direction for the process. We do acknowledge that this work is merely a modeling effort, and that the human brain involves much more complex behavior, rich connectivity, feedback and all sorts of dynamic signal activity occurring in many dimensions.

DATA

INFORMATION

KNOWLEDGE

Input and Output

Before we discuss what goes on inside the framework, we briefly discuss what goes on outside with respect to the cognitive process (i.e., inputs and outputs). Given the overall perspective as described above, signals enter from the left, with the majority of input signals defined as data, the least organized type of signals (Figure 4). Data signals have the highest frequency within our framework, which means that data signals vary quickly and its components are the most time-sensitive of all, relatively concrete in the abstraction dimension. Whether the term information or data or knowledge is used to describe input to or output from a model is a relative issue. However, terminology does take on special significance with respect to modeling cognition due to implications concerning meaning.

Figure 3. Overall direction of cognition within the framework.

Figure 4. Data as Input and Knowledge as Output.

DATA

KNOWLEDGE

Abstraction

We turn now to signal activity within the conceptual framework. In a two-dimensional sense, the vertical dimension of our framework represents space. We are faced with the issue of describing the concept of space in terms of a single dimension, here called the abstraction dimension. That is, the three dimensions of “space” are treated as a single entity; this abstraction of “space” is a major modeling issue in it’s own right. In any case, we begin by describing abstraction as one of two dimensions within our conceptual framework.

Signal abstraction involves a hierarchy of signal forms in the vertical dimension. The signal forms are relative, varying anywhere from concrete to abstract (Figure 5). At the bottom of the hierarchy are concrete signal forms, but similar descriptive terms include: formal, certain, absolute, fundamental, simple, basic, primitive, practical, principle, factual, sensory and machine-like. These terms all have physical connotations and thereby represent physical aspects of modeling reality. At the other end of the spectrum are abstract signal forms, but similar terms include: conceptual, informal, apparent, complex, combined, notional, seeming, cognitive, ideal and intangible. These terms have more of a mental connotation to them, and thus represent mental aspects of modeling reality. Throughout the history of artificial intelligence (and other disciplines as well), the abstract nature of intelligence has proven to be most difficult to model. Yet from a modeling perspective, we cannot ignore the significance of abstraction within the intelligence process.

Abstract

Concrete

Figure 5. Abstraction – internal signal transformations in the vertical dimension.

A simple example of cognitive activity having three levels of abstraction includes thinking, speaking and writing. Naturally, all three of these activities involve thinking. Later we discuss how the various levels of abstraction may contribute to thinking, but using this example we can at least distinguish between three levels of abstraction within our framework. Ordinary or plain thinking (with no output involved) happens to be the most abstract (or least formal) activity of the three mentioned. This places ordinary thinking in the upper level of the framework. However, when we express ourselves using speech, we must output what is “on our mind” in a way that is more formal and more concrete than ordinary thinking. This places speaking somewhere below the level containing ordinary thinking within our abstraction hierarchy. The third level of abstraction in this example, writing, resides in the lowest level of the framework. With writing we express what is “on our mind” in the most formal (or least abstract) fashion of all, by definition. This example illustrates the spatial hierarchy of abstraction within our framework and highlights the apparent differences between these three mental activities, but also implies that these activities are intimately related.

Flow Within the Abstraction Dimension

We have talked about how signals take on physical shape or form in the abstraction dimension. We have also stated that the overall flow of signals in this dimension tends toward increasing abstraction. We choose this direction from a high level perspective by considering what happens outside the mind-model as well as inside. The region outside the mind-model is called the environment or external world, which obviously has an effect on the model with respect to signal inputs and outputs. In the external world, signals are physical and time-sensitive by their very nature. Our mind-model must be able to accept these signals as they occur (i.e., in whatever form they exist). Thus, in the abstraction dimension, signals enter the mind-model mainly in a physical sense. These signals are then processed and transformed into levels of increasing abstraction. This results in an overall signal flow which proceeds from concrete (formal) to abstract in this dimension. Granted, this is a high level perspective, but it is consistent with our overall framework, and this perspective literally helps frame underlying representation issues.
As part of cognition, we realize that abstraction is an exceptional mental ability. The ability to abstract in humans is believed to exceed that of all other animals on the earth, by far. This is in sharp contrast to the exceptional sensory abilities of most animals, believed to exceed those of humans in many cases, by far. A significant part of the human cognitive process involves taking physical, sensory signals from the environment and transforming them into higher and higher levels of abstraction within our mind. With respect to this modeling task, we acknowledge that an abstraction hierarchy exists by making it part of our cognitive framework.

Function and Structure
The next conceptual leap we make within our framework involves associating “abstract” with “function” along the top and “concrete” with “structure” along the bottom, as shown in Figure 6. In this figure, the arrows imply equivalence. This association may appear trivial or contrived, but again it serves a useful modeling purpose. One of our main goals here is to characterize the cognitive process such that we may better model it using computer technology. A major difficulty in modeling cognition and intelligence involves resolving complex relationships between mental function (i.e., mind) and physical structure (i.e., brain). By associating abstract with function and concrete with structure within our framework, we touch upon this great paradox of intelligence, albeit at a very high level. Our motivation at this high level is simple: to realize and describe concepts, to stimulate new ideas and to foster the development of theories in support of modeling the cognitive process.

Abstract Function learned (i.e., by using existing structure). To be sure, learning not only produces structure but also enables function, and the distinction between function and structure gets very fuzzy with respect to learning and cognition. Suffice it to say that having something physical (i.e., structure) is not important if there is no ability to use that “something” effectively (i.e., function). In considering any model of the cognitive process, we must come to grips with the age-old paradox concerning function and structure, two very real aspects of intelligence. Unfortunately, humankind has not yet resolved this paradox. So-called hard sciences like physics, chemistry and biology have not yet fully embraced the abstract nature of mental function. Likewise, so-called soft sciences like psychology, philosophy and sociology have not yet fully embraced the physical and concrete nature of brain structure. Our framework merely provides a conceptual bridge between this metaphorical gap.

Learning and Recall

While we acknowledge that learning plays a key role in the cognitive process, we must also acknowledge the importance of signal recall as part of the process. What we learn is literally of no use unless we can recall it appropriately. Within a modeling system, learning begins with the presentation of input signals, as discussed earlier, resulting in system change and the formation of lasting structure (memory). Cognition is a complex byproduct of learning which occurs in an “intelligent system” only after much learning has taken place. Note that while cognition as used here occurs (arguably) near the end of the intelligence process, we acknowledge the process as being iterative in nature. Recall can only occur after presentation and after cognition, and as the prefix re- implies, recall literally involves signal re-presentation and re-cognition (Figure 7). Our signal-based perspective acknowledges the significant iterative relationship between learning and recall.

Recall

Re-Presentation Re-Cognition

Concrete

Structure

Figure 6. Associating levels of abstraction with function and structure.

Given that structure resides at the bottom of our framework as shown in Figure 6, we acknowledge this implied structure must come from somewhere and, according to our perspective, this structure comes from learning. That is, the learning process produces some kind of lasting structure (i.e., memory). Granted, as perceived in the brain, this so-called structure cannot be rigid or fixed but must be dynamic in nature; but structure exists nonetheless. To go one step further, function is enabled by using that which is

Learning

Presentation

Cognition

Figure 7. Learning and recall as part of the iterative cognitive process.


Meaning and Understanding

The next two concepts we discuss are meaning and understanding, obviously important with respect to intelligence. The word understanding implies that some kind of foundation or structure is needed. Furthermore, the activity implied by understanding is one that involves “making sense” out of signals present. This means several things from our perspective. First, to understand something, we must recognize the inherent order and organization present in signals (i.e., we must recognize signal structure). We must also recognize the potential use of such signals (i.e., we must recognize signal function). Then we must link function to structure. Once we realize or “make real” the links between structure and function within our mind-model, the result represents signal meaning. Meaning occurs by associating formal physical constructs with abstract mental counterparts. In a more global sense, the total set of activated physical constructs in the brain coupled with the set of activated mental functions which “makes use” of those constructs represents understanding. When we perceive something and it “makes sense” to us, part of what must occur is for activated abstract concepts to resonate with activated physical constructs within our mind-model. Understanding and meaning are the result of realizing and activating resonant links within the neural network. The level of understanding depends upon the nature of signals “realized” and the nature of resulting signal resonance.
After providing such a brief description of meaning and understanding, we realize that we have come up short in very many respects. However, it is important to reiterate that, for modeling purposes, we are after a high-level description here. Over time this description must be improved upon and details added. But we emphasize that before any description can occur, the realization of ideas and concepts must occur. That is, we must first realize concepts in our mind before we can model them external to our mind. The risk we take here in simplifying this complex subject is offset by the potentially far-reaching benefits that come from modeling cognition.

Generalization
We now describe generalization, or internal signal transformations in the horizontal dimension of our framework (Figure 8). From an information processing point of view, all signals involve oscillations or pulses. Thus the signals naturally contain frequency, phase and amplitude components and, as already mentioned, the composite signals may transition from data to information to knowledge, respectively, as a function of decreasing frequency. Signals with the highest relative frequency, termed data here, happen to be the least organized. In a modeling sense, signals ought to be processed according to a purpose or direction, and within our perspective an underlying purpose of cognition is to produce fewer signals containing a higher order or greater significance (i.e., to produce “knowledge”). This highlights an important aspect of the generalization process. As large amounts of data are input and processed in an intelligent system, the signals become more ordered and more organized (i.e., the signals literally come to be “in formation”). However, the process does not stop there. Remaining signals may further be reduced, filtered, ordered and organized into knowledge. This perspective offers a convenient way of viewing the cognitive process.

Specific

General

Figure 8. Generalization – internal signal transformations in the horizontal dimension.

Signal Frequency and Period

An example of relative frequency components of signals within our framework (using frequency of rotation) is given in Figure 9. Using the analogy of interconnected gears, data is shown to be the smallest gear and as such must rotate much faster than information to remain engaged in the cognitive process. Likewise, information must rotate more quickly than knowledge to remain engaged. This example not only highlights the relationship of frequency components but also their relative significance within the cognitive process. While the slowest frequency is associated with knowledge, the largest size as shown implies that knowledge carries with it the greatest significance.
Given the importance of frequency components in our signal-based approach, and given the inverse relationship between frequency and time, the following points can be made concerning signals in the generalization dimension. Since data signals are assigned the highest frequency within our framework, these signals consequently have the shortest period or timeframe. Information signals have an intermediate timeframe associated with them, and knowledge has the longest timeframe. This implies that knowledge signals tend to change value least often, if they change at all. Therefore, knowledge holds its value longer than data and information, and it follows that knowledge is more significant than data or information. Consistent with our view of the cognitive process, we see generalization as a process that uses many data signals to produce fewer information signals and even fewer yet more significant knowledge signals. Note that this many- to-few progression within brain activity represents a natural tendency across many levels of brain function, from single neurons to neural clusters and even up to consciousness.

Hi Medium Low

Knowledge

Signal Sequencing

Another consequence of generalization in our signal- based approach has to do with signal sequencing. By sequencing we mean the orderly combination of signals over time. An example of this is found in language. Letters of the alphabet are used to produce words, and the letters may be arranged in many possible ways. But for any given word, a specific sequence of letters must be followed. Furthermore, words may possibly be arranged in many different ways, but for any given phrase or sentence, the exact sequence of words matters, thereby fixing their meaning (i.e., their meaning depends on the use of formal structures). This example serves as a simple reminder of the important role sequencing plays in the cognitive process. Out of the very many sequences of signals that may possibly occur within a mind-model, for any given sequence, specific forms become activated, identified and associated with existing signal-states, thereby giving meaning.
Even at more abstract levels, the signal- sequencing concept may be used to reinforce the point that cognition tends to proceed toward the creation of knowledge, going from many specific constructs to fewer general ones. For example, sequences of many specific sights and sounds combine to trigger abstract thoughts and ideas, and thoughts and ideas combine to form main points in the reasoning process. Again, we aim to exploit this in a modeling sense by recognizing the inherent hierarchy of abstraction within cognition and also by acknowledging the direction of signal flow as proceeding from specific to general in support of knowledge creation.

Signal Hierarchy
The inherent order and direction of the cognitive process naturally bring forth many interesting characteristics. One such characteristic with respect to generalization is shown in Figure 10. Within the basic hierarchy given, many pieces of data combine to form fewer pieces of information, and information pieces combine to form knowledge. Figure 10 shows only one piece of knowledge, and that piece is shown larger than the others, which implies that knowledge is more significant. In the brain, neuronal processes are not so simple or clear-cut, but this concept is important nonetheless. From a signal processing standpoint, data signals have the lowest amplitude and the highest frequency compared with information and knowledge, as already mentioned. As signals are processed, filtered and combined, the end product is knowledge, which consists of signals having the lowest frequency and largest amplitude or significance, relatively speaking.

Data

Information

Figure 9. Analogy of gears and the cognitive process highlights signal frequency relationships.

DATA

INFORMATION

KNOWLEDGE

Figure 10. An illustration of signal hierarchy in the generalization dimension.

Signal Filtering

Another interesting characteristic is that much signal filtering must occur in support of underlying cognitive processes. One way of illustrating signal filtering at a high level is shown in Figure 11. Here many data signals having relatively low amplitude and high frequency are filtered into fewer information signals and then again into knowledge. The amplitude or significance of the signal components is shown to increase along the way. Thus knowledge consists of signals having the largest amplitude and lowest frequency, relatively speaking. This kind of filtering may be used to model processes at the neuronal level, but conceptually this filtering may also be used across many layers and dimensions as well. As believed evident in the human brain, this filtering process could support a sophisticated modeling hierarchy having rich connectivity. Of course, vast amounts of detail must be worked out with respect to signal filtering and then integrated into a cohesive model, which is no small task.
corresponding transformation processes. Admittedly, details of the differences between fusion for abstraction and fusion for generalization must be worked out, but the fusion concept applies to both sub-processes nonetheless.

The Essence of Generalization

As part of cognition, many data signals are processed into fewer information signals and then further into fewer knowledge signals. Consequently, resulting knowledge is considered the most significant of all the signal-states in this progression. Implicitly this means that as a result of all the underlying transformations, knowledge must contain the basic elements of data and information, as well as something more. The cognitive process is such that it cleverly extracts the essence of data as it produces information, and then extracts the essence of information as it produces knowledge. And a curious thing happens along the way. As signals proceed from data to information to knowledge, nonessential elements in time

DATA

INFORMATION

KNOWLEDGE

Signal Fusion
Another characteristic function of biological neurons we would like to model is signal fusion. By fusion we simply mean a process that takes many input signals and fuses them together to produce a single output (Figure 12). We consider signal fusion an important modeling function because, as already implied, biological neurons must perform a function similar to this. The fusion concept is also consistent with the overall flow of signals occurring in both dimensions of this conceptual framework. Abstraction and generalization are both envisioned as involving signal fusion, with many input signals being combined to produce fewer output signals as part of the are abstracted out while essential elements in space are maintained. This implies that the essence of generalization is to produce knowledge*; that is, to produce timeless, spatially concise versions of many specific signals. This aspect of cognition is often taken for granted in everyday life. Our generalizations tend to be overshadowed by the immediate nature of specific, sensory signals, and also by the near-term role consciousness plays in mental activity. Nonetheless, the mind performs generalizations on a regular basis.


Figure 11. An illustration of signal filtering.


Figure 12. An illustration of signal fusion.

The Essence of Abstraction

In a similar fashion, based on our previous discussion in the abstraction dimension, the elements of space or form become abstracted out as signals proceed in the direction of concrete to abstract. This implies that the essence of abstraction is to produce concepts; that is, to produce formless, temporally concise versions of many concrete signals. The abstraction process tends to take many physical, formal signals and produce fewer yet more abstract versions of them. This is a form of generalization as well, implying that the abstraction and generalization processes are inextricably entwined. And similar to generalization, the abstraction concept is often overshadowed in everyday life with respect to cognition, making abstraction somewhat mysterious and counterintuitive, not to mention hard to describe. Considering the nature of our senses and the concrete role consciousness plays in assigning meaning to signals, our mind tends to weigh physically sensed signals more heavily than abstract ones. Yet overall, the mind does perform abstractions on a regular basis, making this another aspect of cognition often taken for granted. From this we can infer that two of the most important aspects of cognition are the ability to abstract and to generalize.

Corner Regions of the Framework

Finally, we complete this overview by describing the corner regions of our framework. But first, a couple of observations about the framework overall. One observation is that physical entities tend to reside in the lower levels of the framework while mental entities reside in the upper levels. This corresponds to the spatial hierarchy within the framework and also has implications concerning signal-flow in the abstraction dimension. Second, entities which change most often tend to be on the left-hand side of the framework while entities which change less often are on the right. This corresponds to the temporal hierarchy within the framework and has signal-flow implications as well in the generalization dimension. Thus the overall framework consists of these overlapping hierarchies which, when combined, form the various regions of this two-dimensional framework (see Figure 1).
The intersection of the abstraction and generalization dimensions helps define the corner regions of our framework. This intersection places raw signal activity in the upper left corner, practical activity in the lower left, theoretical activity in the upper right and fundamental activity in the lower right-hand corner. By “raw” activity here we basically mean unorganized, quickly changing signals. These signals are considered specific and abstract within the context of our framework. By “practical” we mean specific, high-frequency signals that have more form and structure than do raw signals. This implies that these signals have more of a physical presence, indicating that they may more readily be “sensed.” By “theoretical” we mean the combination of abstract and general concepts. For instance, this framework may be considered theoretical. Finally, “fundamental” represents the combination of concrete concepts and general principles. Something theoretical may be considered fundamental once its principle structure becomes formally realized and generally accepted. Together these four corner regions, along with the regions previously mentioned, complete the shell of our conceptual framework.

 Conclusion

We have provided a very general description of cognition as part of the intelligence process and have proposed using a unique conceptual framework from which to view the cognitive process. Human intelligence no doubt involves high levels of processing (i.e., abstract, general), yet the majority of work in AI is done at more specific, lower levels of abstraction. Something (actually, a lot) is missing in AI. We address this void by developing a high level model for general intelligence. This model is hierarchical in nature, exploiting order present within the intelligence process. The order can be described using a simple, general hierarchy, with physical signals at the lowest level, information in the middle, and abstract signal representations at the top. This high level view provides a “big picture” of intelligence, thereby enabling fundamental realizations, better understanding and more clear descriptions of the process. Along with improvements in computer technology, including enhanced hardware, the incorporation of learning and better methods of cooperation, humans will come to use their computational counterparts in countless ways as we face the future together.
